# Explainable Forecasting of Global Horizontal Irradiance over Multiple Time steps using Temporal Fusion Transformer 
Authors: Louiza Ait Mouloud, Aissa Kheldoun, Abdelhakim Deboucha and Saad Mekhilef

# Abstract
Accurate prediction of solar irradiance is essential for the successful integration of solar power plants into electrical systems. Despite recent advancements in deep learning technology yielding impressive results in solar forecasting, their lack of interpretability has hindered their widespread adoption. In this paper, we propose a novel approach that integrates a Temporal Fusion Transformer (TFT) with a McClear sky model (CS-TFT) to achieve accurate and interpretable forecasting performance. The TFT is a deep learning model that provides transparency in its predictions through the use of interpretable self-attention layers for long-term dependencies, recurrent layers for local processing, specialized components for feature selection, and gating layers to suppress extraneous components. The model is capable of learning temporal associations between continuous time-series variables, namely historical GHI and clear sky GHI, accounting for cloud cover variability and clear sky conditions, which are often ignored by most machine learning solar forecasters. Additionally, it minimizes quantile loss during training to produce accurate probabilistic forecasts. In this study, we evaluate the performance of hourly global horizontal irradiance (GHI) forecasts on multiple temporal and spatial forecasting horizons using eight diverse datasets with varying climates: temperate, cold, arid, and equatorial, for multiple temporal horizons of 2-h, 3-h, 6-h, 12-h and 24-h. The model is benchmarked against both climatological persistence for deterministic forecasting and the Complete History Persistence Ensemble (CH-PeEn) for probabilistic forecasting. To prove that our model is not location-locked, it has been trained on Sioux Falls data and tested on four completely different datasets. The results demonstrate that the proposed model outperforms its counterparts across all forecast temporal and spatial horizons.
